Research Paper

A GPU acceleration of 3-D Fourier
reconstruction in cryo-EM

The International Journal of High
Performance Computing Applications
1–12
ª The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1094342019832958
journals.sagepub.com/home/hpc

David Střelák1,2, Carlos Óscar S Sorzano2,
José Marı́a Carazo2 and Jiřı́ Filipovič1

Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy is a popular method for macromolecules structure determination. Reconstruction of a 3-D
volume from raw data obtained from a microscope is highly computationally demanding. Thus, acceleration of the
reconstruction has a great practical value. In this article, we introduce a novel graphics processing unit (GPU)-friendly
algorithm for direct Fourier reconstruction, one of the main computational bottlenecks in the 3-D volume reconstruction
pipeline for some experimental cases (particularly those with a large number of images and a high internal symmetry).
Contrary to the state of the art, our algorithm uses a gather memory pattern, improving cache locality and removing race
conditions in parallel writing into the 3-D volume. We also introduce a finely tuned CUDA implementation of our
algorithm, using auto-tuning to search for a combination of optimization parameters maximizing performance on a given
GPU architecture. Our CUDA implementation is integrated in widely used software Xmipp, version 3.19, reaching 11.4
speedup compared to the original parallel CPU implementation using GPU with comparable power consumption.
Moreover, we have reached 31.7 speedup using four GPUs and 2.14–5.96 speedup compared to optimized GPU
implementation based on a scatter memory pattern.
Keywords
Cryo-EM, GPU, CUDA, 3-D Fourier reconstruction, auto-tuning

1. Introduction
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a popular method
for studying a structure of biological specimens, such as
proteins or larger particles, for example, viruses. In contrast
to X-ray crystallography, the specimen is studied in vitreous ice at cryogenic temperatures, which allows it to
preserve the same conformation as in native environment.
Compared to nuclear magnetic resonance, cryo-EM
allows to study larger structures, making it a superior
method in many use cases. In recent years, rapid development in cryo-EM allowed us to study specimens at nearatomic resolution (Henderson, 2015), resulting in the
identification of cryo-EM as the method of the year by
Nature Methods in 2015 and winning the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 2017.
The crucial part of recent cryo-EM success is a combination between the introduction of direct electron detectors
and a progress in the image processing. The raw data
obtained from microscope contain many noisy images of
the specimen in unknown orientations. In order to fully
reconstruct a 3-D structure, high computational power is
needed. The main bottlenecks of the reconstruction
pipeline are movie alignment (alignment of multiple

frames obtained by a microscope into one image), 2-D
classification (classification and alignment of multiple specimens’ images in order to get rid of contaminants), 3-D
alignment (assigning projection directions to the experimental images), and 3-D reconstruction (creating a 3-D
volume from many 2-D projections of the specimen, especially when a large number of images of a highly symmetric object as an icosahedral virus are available).
We focus on the 3-D reconstruction. During the 3-D
reconstruction, a 3-D volume is created from a large number of 2-D projections (images of the specimen). However,
the orientations of projections are not known a priori. In
order to determine the orientation of projections, we need
to iteratively solve the inverse problem: creation of the 3-D

1

Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic
2
National Center for Biotechnology, Spanish National Research Council,
Madrid, Spain
Corresponding author:
Jiřı́ Filipovič, Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Botanická
68a, Brno 602 00, Czech Republic.
Email: fila@mail.muni.cz

