Amortized Inference for Heterogeneous
Reconstruction in Cryo-EM

Axel Levy
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Frédéric Poitevin
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory

Julien Martel
Stanford University
Ellen D. Zhong ∗
Princeton University

Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is an imaging modality that provides unique
insights into the dynamics of proteins and other building blocks of life. The algorithmic challenge of jointly estimating the poses, 3D structure, and conformational
heterogeneity of a biomolecule from millions of noisy and randomly oriented 2D
projections in a computationally efficient manner, however, remains unsolved. Our
method, cryoFIRE, performs ab initio heterogeneous reconstruction with unknown
poses in an amortized framework, thereby avoiding the computationally expensive
step of pose search while enabling the analysis of conformational heterogeneity.
Poses and conformation are jointly estimated by an encoder while a physics-based
decoder aggregates the images into an implicit neural representation of the conformational space. We show that our method can provide one order of magnitude
speedup on datasets containing millions of images without any loss of accuracy.
We validate that the joint estimation of poses and conformations can be amortized
over the size of the dataset. For the first time, we prove that an amortized method
can extract interpretable dynamic information from experimental datasets.

1

Introduction

Proteins and other biological macromolecules in the cell function through a finely-tuned choreography
of transitions between metastable conformational states. Analyzing the structural heterogeneity of
a biomolecule is therefore critical for applications such as drug design and, more generally, for
understanding these essential building blocks of life.
In a single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) experiment, an aqueous solution of purified biomolecules is flash-frozen in a thin layer of vitreous ice and imaged with a transmission
electron microscope (Fig. 1 (a)). A cryo-EM experiment outputs a large set of unlabeled images,
each containing a 2D projection of a unique molecule, whose 3D structure is sampled from some
thermodynamic distribution (i.e. a conformation) and viewed from an unknown orientation (i.e. a
pose) ϕi = (Ri , ti ) ∈ SO(3) × R2 (Fig. 1 (b)). While homogeneous reconstruction methods focus
on estimating the average 3D electron scattering potential of the studied molecule (the consensus
volume), heterogeneous methods take into account structural variability and introduce a variable zi
for the conformational state that characterizes the electron scattering potential V(., zi ) : R3 → R
associated with observation i [5]. Given the image formation model (detailed in Section 3.1), heterogeneous reconstruction can be seen as an inverse problem where V, zi and ϕi must be inferred from
the observed images Yi . A graphical formulation of the problem is given in Fig. 1 (c).
∗

Correspondence to: zhonge@princeton.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

