CryoSPIN: Improving Ab-Initio Cryo-EM
Reconstruction with Semi-Amortized Pose Inference

1

Shayan Shekarforoush1, 2
shayan@cs.toronto.edu

David B. Lindell1, 2
lindell@cs.toronto.edu

Marcus A. Brubaker1, 2, 3, 4
mab@eecs.yorku.ca

David J. Fleet1, 2, 4
fleet@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto

2

Vector Institute

3

York University

4

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Cryo-EM is an increasingly popular method for determining the atomic resolution
3D structure of macromolecular complexes (eg, proteins) from noisy 2D images
captured by an electron microscope. The computational task is to reconstruct
the 3D density of the particle, along with 3D pose of the particle in each 2D
image, for which the posterior pose distribution is highly multi-modal. Recent
developments in cryo-EM have focused on deep learning for which amortized
inference has been used to predict pose. Here, we address key problems with
this approach, and propose a new semi-amortized method, cryoSPIN, in which
reconstruction begins with amortized inference and then switches to a form of
auto-decoding to refine poses locally using stochastic gradient descent. Through
evaluation on synthetic datasets, we demonstrate that cryoSPIN is able to handle
multi-modal pose distributions during the amortized inference stage, while the later,
more flexible stage of direct pose optimization yields faster and more accurate
convergence of poses compared to baselines. On experimental data, we show
that cryoSPIN outperforms the state-of-the-art cryoAI in speed and reconstruction
quality. Project Webpage.

1

Introduction

Single particle electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) has gained popularity among structural biologists
as a powerful experimental method for determining the 3D structure of macromolecular complexes,
such as proteins and viruses, unlocking our understanding of biological function at the scale of
the cell. Thanks to pioneering advances in hardware and data processing techniques, cryo-EM has
enabled reconstruction of challenging structures at atomic or near-atomic resolution [1].
During a cryo-EM experiment, 104 –107 particle images, each containing an instance of the target
bio-molecule, are acquired using a transmission electron microscope. From that particle stack, the
goal is to reconstruct the unknown 3D density map [2]. This ab-initio reconstruction task presents
some challenges. First, the 3D pose (orientation and position) of the particle in each image is
unknown, and must be inferred along with the 3D structure. Second, low electron exposures are used
to limit radiation damage to the particles (e.g., see Fig. 1). But this reduces the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), obscuring high-resolution image detail and hindering pose and structure estimation. Third,
bio-molecules are typically non-rigid and exhibit structural variations within a sample. Hence, for
such heterogeneous datasets, it is crucial to account for the conformational variability in order to
obtain high-resolution reconstruction [3–6].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

