Articles

© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

cryoSPARC: algorithms for rapid unsupervised cryo-EM
structure determination
Ali Punjani1, John L Rubinstein2–4, David J Fleet5 & Marcus A Brubaker6
Single-particle electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) is a
powerful method for determining the structures of biological
macromolecules. With automated microscopes, cryo-EM data
can often be obtained in a few days. However, processing cryoEM image data to reveal heterogeneity in the protein structure
and to refine 3D maps to high resolution frequently becomes
a severe bottleneck, requiring expert intervention, prior
structural knowledge, and weeks of calculations on expensive
computer clusters. Here we show that stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and branch-and-bound maximum likelihood
optimization algorithms permit the major steps in cryo-EM
structure determination to be performed in hours or minutes
on an inexpensive desktop computer. Furthermore, SGD with
Bayesian marginalization allows ab initio 3D classification,
enabling automated analysis and discovery of unexpected
structures without bias from a reference map. These algorithms
are combined in a user-friendly computer program named
cryoSPARC (http://www.cryosparc.com).

Scientific approaches can be transformed by innovations that
decrease the cost and improve nonexpert usability of technology, as seen with DNA sequencing and synthesis, microarray
technology, and even the use of computers themselves. These
changes can occur both quantitatively by allowing more experiments to be done in a shorter time by both experts and nonspecialists and qualitatively by changing the type and scope
of feasible experiments. Recent advances in single-particle
cryo-EM1,2 have enabled near-atomic-resolution structure determination of biomedically important protein complexes3–5, bringing the technique to the attention of the general biological research
community and pharmaceutical companies. The throughput and
automation of cryo-EM become increasingly important as the
technique is used for structure-based drug design6 and time-critical structural studies of pathogens7. Given appropriately prepared
specimens, automated electron microscopes can collect data
sets for atomic-resolution structure determination in as little as
24 or 48 h; and centralized cryo-EM facilities are now providing
instrument access to nonspecialist investigators. Calculation of

3D maps from cryo-EM images, however, can require weeks of
computational analysis by an expert user. With routine collection
of cryo-EM data sets that contain millions of single-particle
images corresponding to different 3D conformations of the
sample8, the cost of image analysis can exceed 500,000 CPU hours
on large, expensive computer clusters9. Furthermore, without
significant user expertise, there are a variety of ways in which
incorrect and misleading 3D maps can be generated at various
stages in the image analysis pipeline 10,11. The computational
cost and the requirement for user input are bottlenecks for both
automation and widespread use of cryo-EM.
To address these issues, we developed two new algorithms. The
first of these algorithms makes it possible to perform unsupervised ab initio 3D classification, whereby multiple 3D states of a
protein can be discovered from a single sample without user input
of prior structural knowledge and without the assumption that all
3D states resemble each other. In contrast, existing techniques for
3D refinement of cryo-EM maps require an initial structure that
is close to the correct target structure12,13. The second algorithmic development radically speeds up high-resolution refinement
of cryo-EM maps by exploiting characteristics of image alignment to achieve massive computational savings by removing
redundant computation. These two techniques are combined in
a standalone graphics processing unit (GPU) accelerated software
package that we have named cryo-EM single-particle ab initio
reconstruction and classification (cryoSPARC). CryoSPARC
can refine multiple high-resolution 3D structures directly from
single-particle images with no user input or expertise required.
These combined steps are done in a matter of hours on a single
consumer-grade desktop computer. GPU hardware has previously
been used to accelerate cryo-EM contrast transfer function estimation14 and identification of particles within images15. Related
work has shown that exploiting GPU hardware in the popular
program RELION can significantly speed up existing algorithms
for reference-based 3D classification and refinement9. The algorithms presented here provide a further order-of-magnitude
reduction in computational cost compared with that of GPU
acceleration, which would require at least an additional ~7 years

1Department of Computer Science, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 2Molecular Structure and Function Program, The Hospital for Sick Children

Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 3Department of Biochemistry, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 4Department of Medical Biophysics,
The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 5Department of Computer Science, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 6Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence should be addressed to A.P. (alipunjani@cs.toronto.edu) or
M.A.B. (mab@eecs.yorku.ca).
Received 18 August 2016; accepted 27 December 2016; published online 6 February 2017; doi:10.1038/nmeth.4169

290 | VOL.14 NO.3 | MARCH 2017 | nature methods

