Sparse Fourier Backpropagation in Cryo-EM
Reconstruction
Dari Kimanius

Kiarash Jamali

Sjors H.W. Scheres

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
{dari, kjamali, scheres}@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) is a powerful method for investigating the
structures of protein molecules, with important implications for understanding
the molecular processes of life and drug development. In this technique, many
noisy, two-dimensional projection images of protein molecules in unknown poses
are combined into one or more three-dimensional reconstructions. The presence
of multiple structural states in the data represents a major bottleneck in existing
processing pipelines, often requiring expert user supervision. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have recently been proposed as an attractive means for learning
the data manifold of data sets with a large number of different states. These
methods are based on a coordinate-based approach, similar to Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF), to make volumetric reconstructions from 2D image data in Fourierspace. Although NeRF is a powerful method for real-space reconstruction, many of
the benefits of the method do not transfer to Fourier-space, e.g. inductive bias for
spatial locality. We present an approach where the VAE reconstruction is expressed
on a volumetric grid, and demonstrate how this model can be trained efficiently
through a novel backpropagation method that exploits the sparsity of the projection
operation in Fourier-space. We achieve improved results on a simulated data set
and at least equivalent results on an experimental data set when compared to the
coordinate-based approach, while also substantially lowering computational cost.
Our approach is computationally more efficient, especially in inference, enabling
interactive analysis of the latent space by the user.

1

Introduction

Single-particle electron cryo-microscopy (single-particle cryo-EM) has become the fastest growing
method for structure determination of biological macromolecules in recent years, and is becoming
an increasingly important cornerstone of molecular biology research and drug discovery [1, 2, 3, 4].
Briefly, a thin layer of an aqueous solution containing multiple copies of the target molecule in random
orientations is flash frozen to cryogenic temperatures and imaged in a transmission electron microscope. Subsequently, two-dimensional projection images of the Coulomb scattering potential of the
molecules in the sample can be acquired into a micrograph. Micrographs typically contain information
to sub-nanometer details of up to millions of copies of the target molecules that are called particles.
To limit damage to the radiation-sensitive particles, micrographs are acquired under low-dose conditions, which leads to low signal-to-noise ratios (of typically less than 1/10) which requires averaging
over many images [5]. If a sufficient number of approximately identical particles are captured in
distinct projection orientations (or poses), computational methods can be employed to reconstruct
a three-dimensional volume of the scattering potential of the particle. However, the poses of the
individual particles are unknown and many particles adopt multiple conformational states, or assemblies of multiple molecules may vary in their composition. The unknown poses and the potential
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

